doc: esm: improve dual package hazard docs (#30345)
nodejs/node: doc/api/esm.md

package is referenced via `require` (in a CommonJS context) or `import` (in an
ES module context).

[Package Exports][] provide an alternative to `"main"` where the package main
entry point can be defined while also encapsulating the package, preventing any
other entry points besides those defined in `"exports"`. If package entry points
are defined in both `"main"` and `"exports"`, the latter takes precedence in
versions of Node.js that support `"exports"`. [Conditional Exports][] can also
be used within `"exports"` to define different package entry points per

> environment.

Reviewer: Can we combine this into the top paragraph on exports? The main thing we need seems to be just to mention the precedence, which should be as simple as just adding something like "The exports field, which takes higher precedence than main, ..." or similar.

> ### Dual CommonJS/ES Module Packages

Reviewer: This is the section we want to point people to, when answering the question "how to write packages that are both CJS and ESM?". The first code example should thus be something copyable.

Author: Well maybe we should do without a code example then for the hazard explanation. I can just explain the hazard abstractly without any “bad” code for people to copy. The hazard needs to be introduced before the recommended approaches so that the explanations for why they're recommended make sense.

Reviewer: That sounds sensible to me.

bundlers used the ES module entry point, since Node.js ignored (and still
ignores) the top-level `"module"` field.

Node.js can now run ES module entry points, and a package can contain both
CommonJS and ES module entry points (either via separate specifiers such as
`'pkg'` and `'pkg/module'`, or both at the same specifier via [Conditional
Exports][] with the `--experimental-conditional-exports` flag). Unlike in the
scenario where `"module"` is only used by bundlers, or ES module files are
transpiled into CommonJS on the fly before evaluation by Node.js, the files
referenced by the ES module entry point are evaluated as ES modules.

#### Dual Package Hazard

When an application is using a package that provides both CommonJS and ES module
sources, there is a risk of certain bugs if both versions of the package get

> loaded. This potential comes from the fact that the `pkg` created by `const pkg

Reviewer 2: Please could we rename the binding to `const pkgInstance = ...` to make it clear it's just one instance of the module and to differentiate it from the specifier.

  "type": "module",
  "main": "./pkg.cjs",
  "exports": {
    ".": "./pkg.cjs",

>     "./module": "./pkg.mjs"

Reviewer: I really don't like the idea of advising a difference best-practice now, just because our current solution has been agreed to be flagged until January.

This approach can be mentioned (and I believe it is?), but we should document our best consensus (as is documented currently) as to what we think users should be doing, even though we still have the feature flagged, as users deserve to know where things will be going.

Yes, in theory, things can change again here - but then we would be updating the docs to the new best approach.

Author: This particular section isn't advising a best practice, it's introducing the hazard. All the sections suggesting best practices recommend using conditional exports.

Reviewer: See my comment above.

When an application is using a package that provides both CommonJS and ES module
sources, there is a risk of certain bugs if both versions of the package get
loaded. This potential comes from the fact that the `pkgInstance` created by
`const pkgInstance = require('pkg')` is not the same as the `pkgInstance`
created by `import pkgInstance from 'pkg'` (or an alternative main path like

> `'pkg/module'`). This is the “dual package hazard,” where two versions of the

Reviewer: Should this also be `pkg/commonjs`?

Write the package in CommonJS or transpile ES module sources into CommonJS, and
create an ES module wrapper file that defines the named exports. Using
[Conditional Exports][] via the `--experimental-conditional-exports` flag, the
ES module wrapper is used for `import` and the CommonJS entry point for
`require`.

> > Note: While `--experimental-conditional-exports` is flagged, a package

Reviewer: You likely need to remove the `Node:` part for the linter.

> > using this pattern will break when used with `require()` in modern

Reviewer: ```suggestion
> using this pattern will throw when loaded via `require()` in modern
```

Write the package in CommonJS or transpile ES module sources into CommonJS, and
create an ES module wrapper file that defines the named exports. Using

> [Conditional Exports][] via the `--experimental-conditional-exports` flag, the

Reviewer: Could we do what I had previously by having the flagging note at the top in italics - 

```
_This approach is currently experimental and only works under the `--experimental-conditional-exports` flag._
```

Author: I don't think so, because conditional exports no longer applies to the whole section. The last part is an example of using the non-conditional syntax.

Reviewer: I just want to see a single line on its own in italics noting the flag along with the use case.

I know we say to use the flag, but still this is an instruction and piece of advice that will simply not work unflagged. So we need to be very very clear that it is a flagged feature, and highlight that as its own line along with the example.

Perhaps rather just include a line above the example like:

_All consumers of this package will need to use the `--experimental-conditional-exports` flag to ensure `require()` support_

Because otherwise, the footgun is testing it in modern Node - `import()` works, great. Then testing it in legacy Node - `require()` works, great. But forgetting that `require()` breaks in modern Node.js and only finding that out after publishing.

It needs to be documented as a footgun. Because it is.

> 'pkg/module'` by users who are certain that the CommonJS version will not be

Reviewer: We could change the wording in this paragraph to `A variant of this approach not requiring `--experimental-conditional-exports` for consumers can be to ...`

Perhaps we should also note that the variation can progressively enhance to use conditional exports unflagged in future too.

loaded anywhere in the application, such as by dependencies; or if the CommonJS
version can be loaded but doesn’t affect the ES module version (for example,
because the package is stateless). This variant would not require

> `--experimental-conditional-exports`:

Reviewer: I know you mention it here again, but since the first section covered this I don't think we need another code example.

Reviewer: Sorry, no this is exactly the code example we need.

<!-- eslint-skip -->
```js
// ./node_modules/pkg/package.json
{
  "type": "module",
  "main": "./index.cjs",
  "exports": {
    ".": "./index.cjs",
    "./module": "./wrapper.mjs"
  }
}

> ```

Reviewer: So perhaps we can add a note - "This approach can easily be upgraded to act as a single entry point under unflagged dual packages via conditional exports". Or similar wording.

> ##### Approach #2: Isolate State

Reviewer: Do you think we should also note "./module" as the unflagged approach here too? I like including the conditional exports case first, followed by the progressive approach, but don't want it to get confusing too.

* The package stores internal state, and the package author would prefer not to
  refactor the package to isolate its state management. See the next section.

A variant of this approach not requiring `--experimental-conditional-exports`
for consumers could be to add an export, e.g. `"./module"`, to point to an

> all-ES module-syntax version the package. This could be used via `import

Reviewer 3: Not sure, but maybe:
```suggestion
all-ES module-syntax version of the package. This could be used via `import
```

* The package stores internal state, and the package author would prefer not to
  refactor the package to isolate its state management. See the next section.

A variant of this approach not requiring `--experimental-conditional-exports`
for consumers could be to add an export, e.g. `"./module"`, to point to an
all-ES module-syntax version the package. This could be used via `import
'pkg/module'` by users who are certain that the CommonJS version will not be
loaded anywhere in the application, such as by dependencies; or if the CommonJS
version can be loaded but doesn’t affect the ES module version (for example,
because the package is stateless):

<!-- eslint-skip -->
```js
// ./node_modules/pkg/package.json
{
  "type": "module",
  "main": "./index.cjs",
  "exports": {
    ".": "./index.cjs",

>     "./module": "./wrapper.mjs"

Reviewer: Should this example use the `"./commonjs"` pattern then?

Even with isolated state, there is still the cost of possible extra code
execution between the CommonJS and ES module versions of a package.

As with the previous approach, a variant of this approach not requiring
`--experimental-conditional-exports` for consumers could be to add an export,

> e.g. `"./module"`, to point to an all-ES module-syntax version the package:

Reviewer 3: Not sure, but maybe:
```suggestion
e.g. `"./module"`, to point to an all-ES module-syntax version of the package:
```

Even with isolated state, there is still the cost of possible extra code
execution between the CommonJS and ES module versions of a package.

As with the previous approach, a variant of this approach not requiring
`--experimental-conditional-exports` for consumers could be to add an export,
e.g. `"./module"`, to point to an all-ES module-syntax version the package:

<!-- eslint-skip -->
```js
// ./node_modules/pkg/package.json
{
  "type": "module",
  "main": "./index.cjs",
  "exports": {
    ".": "./index.cjs",

>     "./module": "./index.mjs"

Reviewer: Same again?
